---
layout: post
title: "Writing a raytracer in rust"
tags: rust
---

I've wanted to write a raytracer ever since I first learned what that was... and now I've done it! It would probably be more accurate to say that I copied a raytracer out of a [book](http://www.realtimerendering.com/raytracing/Ray%20Tracing%20in%20a%20Weekend.pdf) and translated it from c++ to rust, but that sounds far less cool. It was a great experience and at first I wanted to write about raytracing, but it turns out that there are like 50 years of literature on raytracers and I kept finding things that were essentially what I wanted to write but better. If you're interested in reading about raytracers I'll point you to [some of the things I read along the way](https://github.com/P1n3appl3/ray/#resources). Also I haven't been thinking too hard about all the graphics stuff because of how little I know about the subject, it's more like *read resource* -> *implement thing I read about*.

Instead I want to record my experience with using rust for the project. I think that writing a few thousand lines of code for this has pushed me over the edge in terms of feeling at home/productive in rust. There are some things that made me fall more in love with the language and some that made me pull my hair out because they shouldn't be so difficult, and I'm just going to share as many of those as I can remember in no particular order:

## `Option`
My code contains no possibilities for null pointer dereferences. And I'm not saying that because I'm confident in my ability or I'm using a garbage collector or I exhaustively checked or anything it's just _definitionally impossible_ because I'm using _safe_ rust. This just never gets old, I feel warm and fuzzy every time I express my intent clearly and safely with `Option<T>` instead of `*T`(which might be null). A lot of things I like about rust are trade-offs or stylistic differences, but I'm pretty convinced that this abstraction is objectively better than nullable references in all the ways that matter.

## Tuples
This isn't a huge deal but because I was translating a lot of c++ code, I kept running into the annoyance of function signatures where it's not clear what the inputs and outputs are:

In rust being able to return 2 or more things by putting them in a tuple is just so much nicer. I know "modern" c++ probably has tuples and you're supposed to make "input" arguments constant references or something, but I haven't read much of it and the stuff I was translating was pretty much "c plus classes".

## Crate Ecosystem
considering size of language, crazy good

## Iterators
Rayon and progress: iterators

## Parallelism
Raytracing is a trivial problem to parallelize so not sure if I got the whole picture
Counter was not painful though

## Types
traits are great (image)
foreign trait on foreign type would be even better but unfortunately coherence/concordance/overlapping impls/specialization

## Docs
Language docs themselves are always great
fix legacy book
module struggles

## File Organization
how to structure structs and impls

## Performance
profiling is oof. maybe i'm just dumb

## Tests
I think most people agree that tests are good. The issue is that I am lazy and if I feel like something is just _good_ and not _necessary_ then it probably won't happen all the time. Hopefully I'll have enough experiences where a test helps me find a bug while writing something that I'll realize how necessary they really are. Unfortunately it seems like that takes quite a few times, because I'm not there yet. Luckily when I do have the foresight or hindsight (writing tests when something breaks is a good way to speed up debugging) to write tests, rust makes the process absolutely painless. Not having to install extra things or write more than a handful of lines of boilerplate makes a world of difference when you're lazy. All this being said I've only ever really done unit testing, so I'm not sure what integration testing and mocking are like in any language, much less rust.

## Examples
Cargo has more up it's sleeve than _just_ being a great build system, package manager, testing framework, etc. It also happens to have a nice facility for writing example code. In my raytracer I kind of abused this feature to get multiple binaries, but I think it's still a good use. Essentially I would just write each scene as an example (all that means is putting the file in a directory called examples) and then I could do `cargo run --release --example name_of_some_scene`.

## Mutability/Lifetimes/Globals
Speaking of constant references, constness by default and explicit mutability are pretty great. I'm now thoroughly convinced that the cost of being slightly more verbose sometimes is very much worth the explicitness. In general I'm feeling less adversarial about my relationship with the rust memory model, but we definitely spent a good amount of time yelling at each other over the last 2 months.

There's a kind of fundamental problem in that my program's design doesn't sit well with rusts language constructs. This is because there are two steps to running the raytracer: constructing the scene, and shooting beams of light all over it. The scene itself is just a collection of geometric objects, and since I'm not making an animation engine or anything it should never be modified after construction. I think it is also one of the few times that a large global datastructure is actually the correct approach. There's an argument to be made for scenes being treated just like any other data to make them more flexible, but I'm pretty sure that the decrease in complexity you'd get from a single global scene is actually huge.

Rust _really_ does not make it easy to make this happen. Globals are inconvenient to work with by design because rust wants to discourage you from making global mutable state. That's all good and well but even making global _immutable_ state is very difficult when it comes to initialization. I'm surprised this isn't a thing I've heard discussed a lot because it's such a common thing to do in other languages. You'll read some files and run some setup code and at some well defined point you've constructed for example a world object in a game that just holds all your models you've loaded into memory or something.

The root of my issues is that it's very difficult to use globals in rust. I'm not talking about mutable statics or anything (I will in a bit though), but just making a global constant thing is actually nontrivial because rust won't let you initialize it at run time. Raytracers are effectively "one shot" programs, which changes the priorities around how you manage memory. For example in a one shot program like a compiler, memory leaks aren't actually the end of the world because it's not a process that keeps running. 

## Trees
Problems with clone_box and trees

